

After retrieval, it is not a good practice to directly input all the retrieved information to the LLM for answering questions. Following will introduce adjustments from two perspectives: adjusting the retrieved content and adjusting the LLM.
IV-A Context Curation

Redundant information can interfere with the final generation of LLM, and overly long contexts can also lead LLM to the “Lost in the middle” problem [98]. Like humans, LLM tends to only focus on the beginning and end of long texts, while forgetting the middle portion. Therefore, in the RAG system, we typically need to further process the retrieved content.
IV-A1 Reranking

Reranking fundamentally reorders document chunks to highlight the most pertinent results first, effectively reducing the overall document pool, severing a dual purpose in information retrieval, acting as both an enhancer and a filter, delivering refined inputs for more precise language model processing [70]. Reranking can be performed using rule-based methods that depend on predefined metrics like Diversity, Relevance, and MRR, or model-based approaches like Encoder-Decoder models from the BERT series (e.g., SpanBERT), specialized reranking models such as Cohere rerank or bge-raranker-large, and general large language models like GPT [12, 99].
IV-A2 Context Selection/Compression

A common misconception in the RAG process is the belief that retrieving as many relevant documents as possible and concatenating them to form a lengthy retrieval prompt is beneficial. However, excessive context can introduce more noise, diminishing the LLM’s perception of key information .

(Long) LLMLingua [100, 101] utilize small language models (SLMs) such as GPT-2 Small or LLaMA-7B, to detect and remove unimportant tokens, transforming it into a form that is challenging for humans to comprehend but well understood by LLMs. This approach presents a direct and practical method for prompt compression, eliminating the need for additional training of LLMs while balancing language integrity and compression ratio. PRCA tackled this issue by training an information extractor [69]. Similarly, RECOMP adopts a comparable approach by training an information condenser using contrastive learning [71]. Each training data point consists of one positive sample and five negative samples, and the encoder undergoes training using contrastive loss throughout this process [102] .

In addition to compressing the context, reducing the number of documents aslo helps improve the accuracy of the model’s answers. Ma et al. [103] propose the “Filter-Reranker” paradigm, which combines the strengths of LLMs and SLMs. In this paradigm, SLMs serve as filters, while LLMs function as reordering agents. The research shows that instructing LLMs to rearrange challenging samples identified by SLMs leads to significant improvements in various Information Extraction (IE) tasks. Another straightforward and effective approach involves having the LLM evaluate the retrieved content before generating the final answer. This allows the LLM to filter out documents with poor relevance through LLM critique. For instance, in Chatlaw [104], the LLM is prompted to self-suggestion on the referenced legal provisions to assess their relevance.
IV-B LLM Fine-tuning

Targeted fine-tuning based on the scenario and data characteristics on LLMs can yield better results. This is also one of the greatest advantages of using on-premise LLMs. When LLMs lack data in a specific domain, additional knowledge can be provided to the LLM through fine-tuning. Huggingface’s fine-tuning data can also be used as an initial step.

Another benefit of fine-tuning is the ability to adjust the model’s input and output. For example, it can enable LLM to adapt to specific data formats and generate responses in a particular style as instructed [37]. For retrieval tasks that engage with structured data, the SANTA framework [76] implements a tripartite training regimen to effectively encapsulate both structural and semantic nuances. The initial phase focuses on the retriever, where contrastive learning is harnessed to refine the query and document embeddings.

Aligning LLM outputs with human or retriever preferences through reinforcement learning is a potential approach. For instance, manually annotating the final generated answers and then providing feedback through reinforcement learning. In addition to aligning with human preferences, it is also possible to align with the preferences of fine-tuned models and retrievers [79]. When circumstances prevent access to powerful proprietary models or larger parameter open-source models, a simple and effective method is to distill the more powerful models(e.g. GPT-4). Fine-tuning of LLM can also be coordinated with fine-tuning of the retriever to align preferences. A typical approach, such as RA-DIT [27], aligns the scoring functions between Retriever and Generator using KL divergence.