

In the context of RAG, it is crucial to efficiently retrieve relevant documents from the data source. There are several key issues involved, such as the retrieval source, retrieval granularity, pre-processing of the retrieval, and selection of the corresponding embedding model.
III-A Retrieval Source

RAG relies on external knowledge to enhance LLMs, while the type of retrieval source and the granularity of retrieval units both affect the final generation results.
III-A1 Data Structure

Initially, text is s the mainstream source of retrieval. Subsequently, the retrieval source expanded to include semi-structured data (PDF) and structured data (Knowledge Graph, KG) for enhancement. In addition to retrieving from original external sources, there is also a growing trend in recent researches towards utilizing content generated by LLMs themselves for retrieval and enhancement purposes.

Unstructured Data, such as text, is the most widely used retrieval source, which are mainly gathered from corpus. For open-domain question-answering (ODQA) tasks, the primary retrieval sources are Wikipedia Dump with the current major versions including HotpotQA 4 (1st October , 2017), DPR5 (20 December, 2018). In addition to encyclopedic data, common unstructured data includes cross-lingual text [19] and domain-specific data (such as medical [67]and legal domains [29]).

Semi-structured data. typically refers to data that contains a combination of text and table information, such as PDF. Handling semi-structured data poses challenges for conventional RAG systems due to two main reasons. Firstly, text splitting processes may inadvertently separate tables, leading to data corruption during retrieval. Secondly, incorporating tables into the data can complicate semantic similarity searches. When dealing with semi-structured data, one approach involves leveraging the code capabilities of LLMs to execute Text-2-SQL queries on tables within databases, such as TableGPT [85]. Alternatively, tables can be transformed into text format for further analysis using text-based methods [75]. However, both of these methods are not optimal solutions, indicating substantial research opportunities in this area.

Structured data, such as knowledge graphs (KGs) [86] , which are typically verified and can provide more precise information. KnowledGPT [15] generates KB search queries and stores knowledge in a personalized base, enhancing the RAG model’s knowledge richness. In response to the limitations of LLMs in understanding and answering questions about textual graphs, G-Retriever [84] integrates Graph Neural Networks (GNNs), LLMs and RAG, enhancing graph comprehension and question-answering capabilities through soft prompting of the LLM, and employs the Prize-Collecting Steiner Tree (PCST) optimization problem for targeted graph retrieval. On the contrary, it requires additional effort to build, validate, and maintain structured databases. On the contrary, it requires additional effort to build, validate, and maintain structured databases.

LLMs-Generated Content. Addressing the limitations of external auxiliary information in RAG, some research has focused on exploiting LLMs’ internal knowledge. SKR [58] classifies questions as known or unknown, applying retrieval enhancement selectively. GenRead [13] replaces the retriever with an LLM generator, finding that LLM-generated contexts often contain more accurate answers due to better alignment with the pre-training objectives of causal language modeling. Selfmem [17] iteratively creates an unbounded memory pool with a retrieval-enhanced generator, using a memory selector to choose outputs that serve as dual problems to the original question, thus self-enhancing the generative model. These methodologies underscore the breadth of innovative data source utilization in RAG, striving to improve model performance and task effectiveness.
III-A2 Retrieval Granularity

Another important factor besides the data format of the retrieval source is the granularity of the retrieved data. Coarse-grained retrieval units theoretically can provide more relevant information for the problem, but they may also contain redundant content, which could distract the retriever and language models in downstream tasks [87, 50]. On the other hand, fine-grained retrieval unit granularity increases the burden of retrieval and does not guarantee semantic integrity and meeting the required knowledge. Choosing the appropriate retrieval granularity during inference can be a simple and effective strategy to improve the retrieval and downstream task performance of dense retrievers.

In text, retrieval granularity ranges from fine to coarse, including Token, Phrase, Sentence, Proposition, Chunks, Document. Among them, DenseX [30]proposed the concept of using propositions as retrieval units. Propositions are defined as atomic expressions in the text, each encapsulating a unique factual segment and presented in a concise, self-contained natural language format. This approach aims to enhance retrieval precision and relevance. On the Knowledge Graph (KG), retrieval granularity includes Entity, Triplet, and sub-Graph. The granularity of retrieval can also be adapted to downstream tasks, such as retrieving Item IDs [40]in recommendation tasks and Sentence pairs [38]. Detailed information is illustrated in Table I.
III-B Indexing Optimization

In the Indexing phase, documents will be processed, segmented, and transformed into Embeddings to be stored in a vector database. The quality of index construction determines whether the correct context can be obtained in the retrieval phase.
III-B1 Chunking Strategy

The most common method is to split the document into chunks on a fixed number of tokens (e.g., 100, 256, 512) [88]. Larger chunks can capture more context, but they also generate more noise, requiring longer processing time and higher costs. While smaller chunks may not fully convey the necessary context, they do have less noise. However, chunks leads to truncation within sentences, prompting the optimization of a recursive splits and sliding window methods, enabling layered retrieval by merging globally related information across multiple retrieval processes [89]. Nevertheless, these approaches still cannot strike a balance between semantic completeness and context length. Therefore, methods like Small2Big have been proposed, where sentences (small) are used as the retrieval unit, and the preceding and following sentences are provided as (big) context to LLMs [90].
III-B2 Metadata Attachments

Chunks can be enriched with metadata information such as page number, file name, author,category timestamp. Subsequently, retrieval can be filtered based on this metadata, limiting the scope of the retrieval. Assigning different weights to document timestamps during retrieval can achieve time-aware RAG, ensuring the freshness of knowledge and avoiding outdated information.

In addition to extracting metadata from the original documents, metadata can also be artificially constructed. For example, adding summaries of paragraph, as well as introducing hypothetical questions. This method is also known as Reverse HyDE. Specifically, using LLM to generate questions that can be answered by the document, then calculating the similarity between the original question and the hypothetical question during retrieval to reduce the semantic gap between the question and the answer.
III-B3 Structural Index

One effective method for enhancing information retrieval is to establish a hierarchical structure for the documents. By constructing In structure, RAG system can expedite the retrieval and processing of pertinent data.

Hierarchical index structure. File are arranged in parent-child relationships, with chunks linked to them. Data summaries are stored at each node, aiding in the swift traversal of data and assisting the RAG system in determining which chunks to extract. This approach can also mitigate the illusion caused by block extraction issues.

Knowledge Graph index. Utilize KG in constructing the hierarchical structure of documents contributes to maintaining consistency. It delineates the connections between different concepts and entities, markedly reducing the potential for illusions. Another advantage is the transformation of the information retrieval process into instructions that LLM can comprehend, thereby enhancing the accuracy of knowledge retrieval and enabling LLM to generate contextually coherent responses, thus improving the overall efficiency of the RAG system. To capture the logical relationship between document content and structure, KGP [91] proposed a method of building an index between multiple documents using KG. This KG consists of nodes (representing paragraphs or structures in the documents, such as pages and tables) and edges (indicating semantic/lexical similarity between paragraphs or relationships within the document structure), effectively addressing knowledge retrieval and reasoning problems in a multi-document environment.
III-C Query Optimization

One of the primary challenges with Naive RAG is its direct reliance on the user’s original query as the basis for retrieval. Formulating a precise and clear question is difficult, and imprudent queries result in subpar retrieval effectiveness. Sometimes, the question itself is complex, and the language is not well-organized. Another difficulty lies in language complexity ambiguity. Language models often struggle when dealing with specialized vocabulary or ambiguous abbreviations with multiple meanings. For instance, they may not discern whether “LLM” refers to large language model or a Master of Laws in a legal context.
III-C1 Query Expansion

Expanding a single query into multiple queries enriches the content of the query, providing further context to address any lack of specific nuances, thereby ensuring the optimal relevance of the generated answers.

Multi-Query. By employing prompt engineering to expand queries via LLMs, these queries can then be executed in parallel. The expansion of queries is not random, but rather meticulously designed.

Sub-Query. The process of sub-question planning represents the generation of the necessary sub-questions to contextualize and fully answer the original question when combined. This process of adding relevant context is, in principle, similar to query expansion. Specifically, a complex question can be decomposed into a series of simpler sub-questions using the least-to-most prompting method [92].

Chain-of-Verification(CoVe). The expanded queries undergo validation by LLM to achieve the effect of reducing hallucinations. Validated expanded queries typically exhibit higher reliability [93].
III-C2 Query Transformation

The core concept is to retrieve chunks based on a transformed query instead of the user’s original query.

Query Rewrite.The original queries are not always optimal for LLM retrieval, especially in real-world scenarios. Therefore, we can prompt LLM to rewrite the queries. In addition to using LLM for query rewriting, specialized smaller language models, such as RRR (Rewrite-retrieve-read) [7]. The implementation of the query rewrite method in the Taobao, known as BEQUE [9] has notably enhanced recall effectiveness for long-tail queries, resulting in a rise in GMV.

Another query transformation method is to use prompt engineering to let LLM generate a query based on the original query for subsequent retrieval. HyDE [11] construct hypothetical documents (assumed answers to the original query). It focuses on embedding similarity from answer to answer rather than seeking embedding similarity for the problem or query. Using the Step-back Prompting method [10], the original query is abstracted to generate a high-level concept question (step-back question). In the RAG system, both the step-back question and the original query are used for retrieval, and both the results are utilized as the basis for language model answer generation.
III-C3 Query Routing

Based on varying queries, routing to distinct RAG pipeline,which is suitable for a versatile RAG system designed to accommodate diverse scenarios.

Metadata Router/ Filter. The first step involves extracting keywords (entity) from the query, followed by filtering based on the keywords and metadata within the chunks to narrow down the search scope.

Semantic Router is another method of routing involves leveraging the semantic information of the query. Specific apprach see Semantic Router 6. Certainly, a hybrid routing approach can also be employed, combining both semantic and metadata-based methods for enhanced query routing.
III-D Embedding

In RAG, retrieval is achieved by calculating the similarity (e.g. cosine similarity) between the embeddings of the question and document chunks, where the semantic representation capability of embedding models plays a key role. This mainly includes a sparse encoder (BM25) and a dense retriever (BERT architecture Pre-training language models). Recent research has introduced prominent embedding models such as AngIE, Voyage, BGE,etc [94, 95, 96], which are benefit from multi-task instruct tuning. Hugging Face’s MTEB leaderboard 7 evaluates embedding models across 8 tasks, covering 58 datasests. Additionally, C-MTEB focuses on Chinese capability, covering 6 tasks and 35 datasets. There is no one-size-fits-all answer to “which embedding model to use.” However, some specific models are better suited for particular use cases.
III-D1 Mix/hybrid Retrieval

Sparse and dense embedding approaches capture different relevance features and can benefit from each other by leveraging complementary relevance information. For instance, sparse retrieval models can be used to provide initial search results for training dense retrieval models. Additionally, pre-training language models (PLMs) can be utilized to learn term weights to enhance sparse retrieval. Specifically, it also demonstrates that sparse retrieval models can enhance the zero-shot retrieval capability of dense retrieval models and assist dense retrievers in handling queries containing rare entities, thereby improving robustness.
III-D2 Fine-tuning Embedding Model

In instances where the context significantly deviates from pre-training corpus, particularly within highly specialized disciplines such as healthcare, legal practice, and other sectors replete with proprietary jargon, fine-tuning the embedding model on your own domain dataset becomes essential to mitigate such discrepancies.

In addition to supplementing domain knowledge, another purpose of fine-tuning is to align the retriever and generator, for example, using the results of LLM as the supervision signal for fine-tuning, known as LSR (LM-supervised Retriever). PROMPTAGATOR [21] utilizes the LLM as a few-shot query generator to create task-specific retrievers, addressing challenges in supervised fine-tuning, particularly in data-scarce domains. Another approach, LLM-Embedder [97], exploits LLMs to generate reward signals across multiple downstream tasks. The retriever is fine-tuned with two types of supervised signals: hard labels for the dataset and soft rewards from the LLMs. This dual-signal approach fosters a more effective fine-tuning process, tailoring the embedding model to diverse downstream applications. REPLUG [72] utilizes a retriever and an LLM to calculate the probability distributions of the retrieved documents and then performs supervised training by computing the KL divergence. This straightforward and effective training method enhances the performance of the retrieval model by using an LM as the supervisory signal, eliminating the need for specific cross-attention mechanisms. Moreover, inspired by RLHF (Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback), utilizing LM-based feedback to reinforce the retriever through reinforcement learning.
III-E Adapter

Fine-tuning models may present challenges, such as integrating functionality through an API or addressing constraints arising from limited local computational resources. Consequently, some approaches opt to incorporate an external adapter to aid in alignment.

To optimize the multi-task capabilities of LLM, UPRISE [20] trained a lightweight prompt retriever that can automatically retrieve prompts from a pre-built prompt pool that are suitable for a given zero-shot task input. AAR (Augmentation-Adapted Retriver) [47] introduces a universal adapter designed to accommodate multiple downstream tasks. While PRCA [69] add a pluggable reward-driven contextual adapter to enhance performance on specific tasks. BGM [26] keeps the retriever and LLM fixed,and trains a bridge Seq2Seq model in between. The bridge model aims to transform the retrieved information into a format that LLMs can work with effectively, allowing it to not only rerank but also dynamically select passages for each query, and potentially employ more advanced strategies like repetition. Furthermore, PKG introduces an innovative method for integrating knowledge into white-box models via directive fine-tuning [75]. In this approach, the retriever module is directly substituted to generate relevant documents according to a query. This method assists in addressing the difficulties encountered during the fine-tuning process and enhances model performance.